In this work we propose an automatic way of generating and verifying formal models of signaling and transcriptional
events, gathered in large-scale regulatory networks, by integrating temporal and stochastic aspects of 
the expression of some biological components, measured during a real experiment.   To achieve this we rely 
on the Process Hitting (PH) formalism  and an stochastic simulation of the built PH hybrid model.  
This choice on one hand limits us to discrete data, but on the other, allows us to handle models built upon 
large-scale interaction graphs, to express different levels of logic rules between a node and its direct 
predecessors, and to reproduce dynamic behaviors of the components with minimal stochastic parameter estimation.  
The model proposed is based on a real case study of keratinocyte differentiation, in which gene time-series data 
was generated upon the calcium stimulation of the E-cadherin protein.

This work has the following contributions. First, we built an interaction graph linking a signaling molecule, 
E-cadherin, to genes present in our time-series data and to key cellular processes for our case study, such as 
keratinocyte-differentiation and cellular-proliferation.  This graph was automatically extracted from the Pathway 
Interaction Database (PID) using a method proposed in. Second, we proposed an automatic 
transformation of selected known biological patterns present in  PID in order to generate PH modules. Additionally, 
we added necessary constraints to the PH model to avoid biologically incoherent dynamical behaviors.  
Third, we proposed a way of estimating temporal and stochastic parameters from time-series expression data to 
model the measured genes.  These parameters were used for the stochastic simulation of the model.  Finally, 
we discretized the experimental data to allow the comparison with simulation results. 

We show that our approach allows us to reproduce different dynamic behaviors of the components in such a large network,
by stochastically simulating this hybrid model.  We are able to generate, for some cases, a close match to the 
experimental results with very few parameter calibration. Moreover, we generated dynamical predictions, 
consquences of the time-series data, on key cellular processes for our case study.
